README.md, before:

# BridgeSocket 🪼

<p align="center">
  <img src="assets/jellyfishy.png" alt="BridgeSocket jellyfish mascot" width="80" style="vertical-align: middle;" />
  <img src="assets/bridgesocket-logo.png" alt="BridgeSocket logo" width="480" style="vertical-align: middle;" />
</p>

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://github.com/cpauldev/bridgesocket/actions/workflows/ci.yml"><img alt="build" src="https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/cpauldev/bridgesocket/ci.yml?branch=main&style=for-the-badge&label=build" height="28" style="vertical-align: middle;" /></a>
  <a href="https://github.com/cpauldev/bridgesocket/releases"><img alt="release" src="https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/cpauldev/bridgesocket?style=for-the-badge&label=release" height="28" style="vertical-align: middle;" /></a>
  <a href="LICENSE"><img alt="license" src="https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-blue?style=for-the-badge" height="28" style="vertical-align: middle;" /></a>
</p>

BridgeSocket is a universal bridge for local development tools. It mounts a same-origin control plane (`/__bridgesocket/*`) on your host dev server so browser UIs and local clients can read state, stream events, control runtime lifecycle, and proxy runtime APIs consistently across frameworks.

## Who Should Use This

| You are...                                                | Should you use BridgeSocket directly? | Why                                                                                             |
| --------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Building a developer tool (overlay/sidebar/control panel) | Yes                                   | BridgeSocket provides framework adapters, bridge routes, runtime control, and event streaming.  |
| Building custom internal developer tooling                | Yes                                   | Use BridgeSocket directly to mount same-origin bridge APIs and optional runtime control in dev. |
| Using a tool that already ships BridgeSocket integration  | No                                    | Follow that tool's setup instructions; the integration is already handled.                      |

## Table Of Contents

- [Why BridgeSocket Matters](#why-bridgesocket-matters)
- [What It Provides](#what-it-provides)
- [Common Use Cases](#common-use-cases)
- [Install](#install)
- [Quick Start](#quick-start)
- [Integration Surfaces](#integration-surfaces)
- [API Naming Patterns](#api-naming-patterns)
- [Configuration](#configuration)
- [Bridge Routes](#bridge-routes)
- [Bridge Events](#bridge-events)
- [Client API (`bridgesocket/client`)](#client-api-bridgesocketclient)
- [Adapter Examples](#adapter-examples)
- [Next.js Bridge Keys](#nextjs-bridge-keys)
- [Compatibility](#compatibility)
- [Documentation](#documentation)
- [Packaging](#packaging)

## Why BridgeSocket Matters

If you build a local dev tool that appears next to an app (overlay, sidebar, control panel), framework-specific integration becomes expensive fast. Frameworks, servers, and build tools expose different hooks, so teams either reimplement the same integration layer repeatedly, support one stack only, or skip the tool entirely.

BridgeSocket gives you one shared adapter and bridge layer so you can focus on product behavior and UX while BridgeSocket handles integration and transport.

BridgeSocket primarily targets browser-based dev UIs, but the same bridge also works for non-UI local clients such as scripts and CLIs.

## What It Provides

- same-origin bridge routes (default prefix: `/__bridgesocket`)
- runtime lifecycle control (`start`, `restart` require `command`; `stop` is idempotent)
- runtime status state for UI and automation
- versioned bridge contract (`protocolVersion: "1"`)
- websocket event stream (`/__bridgesocket/events`) with ordered event IDs
- API proxying from host origin to runtime origin (`/__bridgesocket/api/*`)
- binary proxy fidelity and multi-value `Set-Cookie` forwarding
- typed client helpers via `bridgesocket/client`
- framework/server/build-tool adapters

BridgeSocket does not include a first-party UI, app scaffolding, or hosted cloud services.

## Common Use Cases

- Cross-framework SaaS developer tools
- AI code-assistance overlays
- Local developer extension marketplaces
- Drag-and-drop UI composition and page editing tools
- Error triage, debugging, and remediation control panels
- Localization and internationalization management systems

## Install

```bash
npm i bridgesocket
```

```bash
pnpm add bridgesocket
```

```bash
yarn add bridgesocket
```

```bash
bun add bridgesocket
```

## Quick Start

```ts
// vite.config.ts
import { createBridgeSocketVitePlugin } from "bridgesocket/vite";
import { defineConfig } from "vite";

export default defineConfig({
  plugins: [
    createBridgeSocketVitePlugin({
      command: "node",
      args: ["./scripts/dev-runtime.js"],
    }),
  ],
});
```

If your package wraps this integration, your end users typically only install your package and run their usual `dev` command.

## Integration Surfaces

| Host setup                                                                                        | Import path                | Use when                                         |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------ |
| Vite-based framework (Vue, SvelteKit, TanStack Start, Remix, React Router, Angular Vite pipeline) | `bridgesocket/vite`        | You want one Vite plugin path.                   |
| Next.js                                                                                           | `bridgesocket/next`        | You want a Next config wrapper and rewrite flow. |
| Nuxt                                                                                              | `bridgesocket/nuxt`        | You want a Nuxt module integration.              |
| Astro                                                                                             | `bridgesocket/astro`       | You want Astro integration hooks.                |
| Angular CLI (non-Vite pipeline)                                                                   | `bridgesocket/angular/cli` | You need generated proxy config for `ng serve`.  |
| `Bun.serve`                                                                                       | `bridgesocket/bun`         | You need Bun-native fetch/websocket handlers.    |
| Node middleware + HTTP server                                                                     | `bridgesocket/node`        | You want direct server attachment.               |
| Fastify                                                                                           | `bridgesocket/fastify`     | You want Fastify hook-based integration.         |
| Hono on Node server                                                                               | `bridgesocket/hono`        | You want Hono Node server attachment.            |
| webpack-dev-server                                                                                | `bridgesocket/webpack`     | You want build-tool level middleware wiring.     |
| Rsbuild                                                                                           | `bridgesocket/rsbuild`     | You want build-tool level middleware wiring.     |
| Rspack                                                                                            | `bridgesocket/rspack`      | You want build-tool level middleware wiring.     |

Runtime note:

- `bridgesocket/node` refers to a Node-style server interface, not Node-only runtime.
- for `Bun.serve`, use `bridgesocket/bun`.
- BridgeSocket supports Node and Bun runtimes.

## API Naming Patterns

| Pattern                 | Meaning                                                        |
| ----------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `createBridgeSocket*`   | Create a plugin/module/integration value.                      |
| `withBridgeSocket*`     | Wrap and return an updated config object.                      |
| `attachBridgeSocketTo*` | Imperatively attach BridgeSocket to a running server instance. |
| `startBridgeSocket*`    | Start a standalone bridge/helper and return a handle.          |

Common APIs:

| API                                       | Import path                |
| ----------------------------------------- | -------------------------- |
| `createBridgeSocketVitePlugin`            | `bridgesocket/vite`        |
| `createBridgeSocketUnplugin`              | `bridgesocket`             |
| `withBridgeSocketNext`                    | `bridgesocket/next`        |
| `createBridgeSocketAstroIntegration`      | `bridgesocket/astro`       |
| `createBridgeSocketNuxtModule`            | `bridgesocket/nuxt`        |
| `createBridgeSocketAngularCliProxyConfig` | `bridgesocket/angular/cli` |
| `startBridgeSocketAngularCliBridge`       | `bridgesocket/angular/cli` |
| `withBridgeSocketAngularCliProxyConfig`   | `bridgesocket/angular/cli` |
| `attachBridgeSocketToBunServe`            | `bridgesocket/bun`         |
| `attachBridgeSocketToNodeServer`          | `bridgesocket/node`        |
| `attachBridgeSocketToFastify`             | `bridgesocket/fastify`     |
| `attachBridgeSocketToHonoNodeServer`      | `bridgesocket/hono`        |
| `withBridgeSocketWebpackDevServer`        | `bridgesocket/webpack`     |
| `withBridgeSocketRsbuild`                 | `bridgesocket/rsbuild`     |
| `withBridgeSocketRspack`                  | `bridgesocket/rspack`      |

## Configuration

All adapters accept `BridgeSocketAdapterOptions`, which extends bridge/runtime options.

Core options:

| Option                     | Type                                  | Default                       | Notes                                          |
| -------------------------- | ------------------------------------- | ----------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------- |
| `autoStart`                | `boolean`                             | `true`                        | Auto-start runtime on state/proxy/event paths. |
| `bridgePathPrefix`         | `string`                              | `"/__bridgesocket"`           | Route prefix for bridge endpoints.             |
| `fallbackCommand`          | `string`                              | `"bridgesocket dev"`          | Returned in error payloads for recovery UX.    |
| `command`                  | `string`                              | none                          | Required for managed runtime lifecycle.        |
| `args`                     | `string[]`                            | `[]`                          | Runtime process args.                          |
| `cwd`                      | `string`                              | `process.cwd()`               | Runtime working directory.                     |
| `env`                      | `Record<string, string \| undefined>` | none                          | Extra runtime env vars.                        |
| `host`                     | `string`                              | `"127.0.0.1"`                 | Runtime host binding.                          |
| `healthPath`               | `string`                              | `"/api/version"`              | Health probe path used after spawn.            |
| `startTimeoutMs`           | `number`                              | `15000`                       | Runtime health timeout.                        |
| `runtimePortEnvVar`        | `string`                              | `"BRIDGESOCKET_RUNTIME_PORT"` | Env var populated with allocated port.         |
| `eventHeartbeatIntervalMs` | `number`                              | `30000`                       | Ping interval for stale WS client cleanup.     |

Adapter-specific options:

| Option                | Type     | Default                        | Notes                                              |
| --------------------- | -------- | ------------------------------ | -------------------------------------------------- |
| `adapterName`         | `string` | `"bridgesocket-bridge"`        | Plugin/module name where applicable.               |
| `rewriteSource`       | `string` | `"/__bridgesocket/:path*"`     | Rewrite pattern used by Next wrapper.              |
| `nextBridgeGlobalKey` | `string` | auto-generated in Next wrapper | Override for deterministic Next standalone keying. |

## Bridge Routes

With default prefix `/__bridgesocket`:

- `GET /__bridgesocket/health`
- `GET /__bridgesocket/state`
- `GET /__bridgesocket/runtime/status`
- `POST /__bridgesocket/runtime/start`
- `POST /__bridgesocket/runtime/restart`
- `POST /__bridgesocket/runtime/stop`
- `WS /__bridgesocket/events`
- `ANY /__bridgesocket/api/*` (proxied to runtime as `/api/*`)

Notes:

- `GET /state` may auto-start runtime when `autoStart` is enabled.
- bridge routes are query-safe (for example `GET /__bridgesocket/state?source=ui`).
- `POST /runtime/stop` disables auto-start until `start` or `restart` is called.
- bridge-generated errors use envelope shape: `{ success: false, message, error: { code, message, retryable, details? } }`.
- proxied `/api/*` responses pass through upstream status/body/headers and are not envelope-wrapped by default.

## Bridge Events

Current event union:

- `runtime-status`
- `runtime-error`

Bridge-emitted events include:

- `protocolVersion` (`"1"`)
- `eventId` (monotonic per bridge instance)
- `timestamp` (epoch milliseconds)

WebSocket subprotocol:

- supported: `bridgesocket.v1+json`
- if a client sends `Sec-WebSocket-Protocol`, the offered list must include `bridgesocket.v1+json`; otherwise the bridge rejects with `426`
- when accepted, the bridge negotiates `bridgesocket.v1+json`

Type source: `src/types.ts` (`BridgeSocketBridgeEvent`).

## Client API (`bridgesocket/client`)

```ts
import { createBridgeSocketClient } from "bridgesocket/client";

const client = createBridgeSocketClient({
  baseUrl: "http://127.0.0.1:3000",
});

const health = await client.getHealth();
const state = await client.getState();
const runtime = await client.startRuntime();

const unsubscribe = client.subscribeEvents((event) => {
  console.log(event.type, event.eventId);
});

unsubscribe();
```

In Node environments, pass a WebSocket implementation with `webSocketFactory` when needed.

## Adapter Examples

### Next.js

```ts
// next.config.ts
import { withBridgeSocketNext } from "bridgesocket/next";

export default withBridgeSocketNext(
  { reactStrictMode: true },
  {
    command: "node",
    args: ["./scripts/dev-runtime.js"],
  },
);
```

### Astro

```ts
// astro.config.ts
import { defineConfig } from "astro/config";
import { createBridgeSocketAstroIntegration } from "bridgesocket/astro";

export default defineConfig({
  integrations: [createBridgeSocketAstroIntegration()],
});
```

### Nuxt

```ts
// nuxt.config.ts
import { createBridgeSocketNuxtModule } from "bridgesocket/nuxt";
import { defineNuxtConfig } from "nuxt/config";

export default defineNuxtConfig({
  modules: [createBridgeSocketNuxtModule()],
});
```

### Angular CLI (Proxy Config)

```ts
// bridgesocket.proxy.mjs
import { createBridgeSocketAngularCliProxyConfig } from "bridgesocket/angular/cli";
import { writeFile } from "node:fs/promises";

const proxyConfig = await createBridgeSocketAngularCliProxyConfig();
await writeFile(
  new URL("./proxy.bridgesocket.json", import.meta.url),
  JSON.stringify(proxyConfig, null, 2),
);
```

Then:

```bash
node bridgesocket.proxy.mjs
ng serve --proxy-config proxy.bridgesocket.json
```

### Bun.serve

```ts
import {
  attachBridgeSocketToBunServe,
  withBridgeSocketBunServeFetch,
  withBridgeSocketBunServeWebSocketHandlers,
} from "bridgesocket/bun";

const bridgesocket = await attachBridgeSocketToBunServe({
  command: "node",
  args: ["./scripts/dev-runtime.js"],
});

const server = Bun.serve({
  fetch: withBridgeSocketBunServeFetch(
    (request) => new Response(`route: ${new URL(request.url).pathname}`),
    bridgesocket,
  ),
  websocket: withBridgeSocketBunServeWebSocketHandlers(bridgesocket),
});

await bridgesocket.close();
server.stop();
```

### Node Server

```ts
import { attachBridgeSocketToNodeServer } from "bridgesocket/node";
import express from "express";
import http from "node:http";

const app = express();
const server = http.createServer(app);

await attachBridgeSocketToNodeServer(
  {
    middlewares: { use: app.use.bind(app) },
    httpServer: server,
  },
  { command: "node", args: ["./scripts/dev-runtime.js"] },
);
```

### Webpack Dev Server

```ts
import { withBridgeSocketWebpackDevServer } from "bridgesocket/webpack";

export default {
  devServer: withBridgeSocketWebpackDevServer({
    setupMiddlewares: (middlewares) => middlewares,
  }),
};
```

## Next.js Bridge Keys

`withBridgeSocketNext(nextConfig, options)` uses a standalone bridge behind rewrites in development.

Default behavior:

- each wrapper call gets a unique per-instance key
- this avoids collisions when multiple Next servers run in the same process

Optional override:

- set `nextBridgeGlobalKey` when you need deterministic keying or intentionally shared bridge state

```ts
import { withBridgeSocketNext } from "bridgesocket/next";

export default withBridgeSocketNext(
  { reactStrictMode: true },
  {
    nextBridgeGlobalKey: "__BRIDGESOCKET_NEXT_BRIDGE__:workspace-a",
  },
);
```

## Compatibility

- runtime support target: Node.js and Bun
- module format: ESM package (`"type": "module"`)
- CI matrix: Node `20.x`, Node `22.x`, Bun `1.3.9`
- validated by:
  - unit tests
  - adapter integration tests
  - e2e runtime control tests
  - e2e bridge event flow tests

## Documentation

- `README.md`: product overview, installation, and integration entrypoints
- `PROTOCOL.md`: normative bridge contract (routes, events, errors, versioning)
- `ARCHITECTURE.md`: internal component boundaries and data flow

Guardrails:

- `bun run docs:lint` validates markdown docs
- `bun run docs:check` enforces docs synchronization for protocol/API-impacting source changes

## Packaging

Published artifacts are built from `src/` into `dist/` with declaration files:

- runtime JS and `.d.ts` output in `dist`
- package includes `README.md`, `PROTOCOL.md`, `ARCHITECTURE.md`, and `LICENSE`
- release guard via `prepublishOnly`: build + test + typecheck

Commit message:

[skip ci] feat(preset): add unified tool preset and simplify Vite adapter
- add createBridgeSocketToolPreset export at bridgesocket/preset

- add preset tests and integration guide for tool-author workflow

- remove unplugin dependency and expose direct Vite plugin factory

- update README integration surfaces, use cases, and docs references

README.md, after:

# BridgeSocket 🪼

<p align="center">
  <img src="assets/jellyfishy.png" alt="BridgeSocket jellyfish mascot" width="80" style="vertical-align: middle;" />
  <img src="assets/bridgesocket-logo.png" alt="BridgeSocket logo" width="480" style="vertical-align: middle;" />
</p>

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://github.com/cpauldev/bridgesocket/actions/workflows/ci.yml"><img alt="build" src="https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/cpauldev/bridgesocket/ci.yml?branch=main&style=for-the-badge&label=build" height="28" style="vertical-align: middle;" /></a>
  <a href="https://github.com/cpauldev/bridgesocket/releases"><img alt="release" src="https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/cpauldev/bridgesocket?style=for-the-badge&label=release" height="28" style="vertical-align: middle;" /></a>
  <a href="LICENSE"><img alt="license" src="https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-blue?style=for-the-badge" height="28" style="vertical-align: middle;" /></a>
</p>

BridgeSocket is a universal bridge for local development tools. It mounts a same-origin control plane (`/__bridgesocket/*`) on your host dev server so browser UIs and local clients can read state, stream events, control runtime lifecycle, and proxy runtime APIs consistently across frameworks.

## Who Should Use This

| You are...                                                | Should you use BridgeSocket directly? | Why                                                                                             |
| --------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Building a developer tool (overlay/sidebar/control panel) | Yes                                   | BridgeSocket provides framework adapters, bridge routes, runtime control, and event streaming.  |
| Building custom internal developer tooling                | Yes                                   | Use BridgeSocket directly to mount same-origin bridge APIs and optional runtime control in dev. |
| Using a tool that already ships BridgeSocket integration  | No                                    | Follow that tool's setup instructions; the integration is already handled.                      |

## Table Of Contents

- [Why BridgeSocket Matters](#why-bridgesocket-matters)
- [What It Provides](#what-it-provides)
- [Use Cases](#use-cases)
- [Install](#install)
- [Quick Start](#quick-start)
- [Integration Surfaces](#integration-surfaces)
- [API Naming Patterns](#api-naming-patterns)
- [Configuration](#configuration)
- [Bridge Routes](#bridge-routes)
- [Bridge Events](#bridge-events)
- [Client API (`bridgesocket/client`)](#client-api-bridgesocketclient)
- [Adapter Examples](#adapter-examples)
- [Next.js Bridge Keys](#nextjs-bridge-keys)
- [Compatibility](#compatibility)
- [Documentation](#documentation)
- [Packaging](#packaging)

## Why BridgeSocket Matters

Imagine you’re building a developer companion that runs next to a local web app, such as an overlay, sidebar, or control panel. It might be a paid tool suite, a component marketplace with drag-and-drop editing, or a CLI companion UI for setup and real-time project status. You want it to work across frameworks instead of being tied to one stack, similarly to wanting an app to work on iOS, Android, and desktop rather than one specific operating system.

The problem is that frameworks, dev servers, and build tools all expose integration hooks differently. Without a shared integration layer, teams either rebuild the same glue code per stack, support only one framework, or drop the idea due to complexity.

BridgeSocket solves this by providing a shared adapter + bridge layer, so you can build the product and UX, while BridgeSocket handles cross-framework integration and same-origin transport. With BridgeSocket, developers can create univerally-compatible plugins and users can use them on the framework of their choice with minimal setup.

BridgeSocket primarily targets browser-based dev UIs, but the same bridge also works for non-UI local clients such as scripts and CLIs.

## What It Provides

- same-origin bridge routes (default prefix: `/__bridgesocket`)
- runtime lifecycle control (`start`, `restart` require `command`; `stop` is idempotent)
- runtime status state for UI and automation
- versioned bridge contract (`protocolVersion: "1"`)
- websocket event stream (`/__bridgesocket/events`) with ordered event IDs
- API proxying from host origin to runtime origin (`/__bridgesocket/api/*`)
- binary proxy fidelity and multi-value `Set-Cookie` forwarding
- typed client helpers via `bridgesocket/client`
- framework/server/build-tool adapters

BridgeSocket does not include a first-party UI, app scaffolding, or hosted cloud services.

## Use Cases

- Cross-framework SaaS services with auth and subscription flows
- AI code-assistance overlays with page annotations
- Extension marketplaces for local development apps
- UI component-library drag-and-drop and page editing tools
- Error triage, debugging, and AI-assisted remediation workflows
- Localization and internationalization management systems

## Install

```bash
npm i bridgesocket
```

```bash
pnpm add bridgesocket
```

```bash
yarn add bridgesocket
```

```bash
bun add bridgesocket
```

## Quick Start

```ts
// vite.config.ts
import { createBridgeSocketVitePlugin } from "bridgesocket/vite";
import { defineConfig } from "vite";

export default defineConfig({
  plugins: [
    createBridgeSocketVitePlugin({
      command: "node",
      args: ["./scripts/dev-runtime.js"],
    }),
  ],
});
```

If your package wraps this integration, your end users typically only install your package and run their usual `dev` command.

## Integration Surfaces

| Host setup                                                                                        | Import path                | Use when                                         |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------ |
| Vite-based framework (Vue, SvelteKit, TanStack Start, Remix, React Router, Angular Vite pipeline) | `bridgesocket/vite`        | You want one Vite plugin path.                   |
| Next.js                                                                                           | `bridgesocket/next`        | You want a Next config wrapper and rewrite flow. |
| Nuxt                                                                                              | `bridgesocket/nuxt`        | You want a Nuxt module integration.              |
| Astro                                                                                             | `bridgesocket/astro`       | You want Astro integration hooks.                |
| Angular CLI (non-Vite pipeline)                                                                   | `bridgesocket/angular/cli` | You need generated proxy config for `ng serve`.  |
| `Bun.serve`                                                                                       | `bridgesocket/bun`         | You need Bun-native fetch/websocket handlers.    |
| Node middleware + HTTP server                                                                     | `bridgesocket/node`        | You want direct server attachment.               |
| Fastify                                                                                           | `bridgesocket/fastify`     | You want Fastify hook-based integration.         |
| Hono on Node server                                                                               | `bridgesocket/hono`        | You want Hono Node server attachment.            |
| webpack-dev-server                                                                                | `bridgesocket/webpack`     | You want build-tool level middleware wiring.     |
| Rsbuild                                                                                           | `bridgesocket/rsbuild`     | You want build-tool level middleware wiring.     |
| Rspack                                                                                            | `bridgesocket/rspack`      | You want build-tool level middleware wiring.     |

Runtime note:

- `bridgesocket/node` refers to a Node-style server interface, not Node-only runtime.
- for `Bun.serve`, use `bridgesocket/bun`.
- BridgeSocket supports Node and Bun runtimes.

## API Naming Patterns

| Pattern                 | Meaning                                                        |
| ----------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `createBridgeSocket*`   | Create a plugin/module/integration value.                      |
| `withBridgeSocket*`     | Wrap and return an updated config object.                      |
| `attachBridgeSocketTo*` | Imperatively attach BridgeSocket to a running server instance. |
| `startBridgeSocket*`    | Start a standalone bridge/helper and return a handle.          |

Common APIs:

| API                                       | Import path                |
| ----------------------------------------- | -------------------------- |
| `createBridgeSocketToolPreset`            | `bridgesocket/preset`      |
| `createBridgeSocketVitePlugin`            | `bridgesocket/vite`        |
| `withBridgeSocketNext`                    | `bridgesocket/next`        |
| `createBridgeSocketAstroIntegration`      | `bridgesocket/astro`       |
| `createBridgeSocketNuxtModule`            | `bridgesocket/nuxt`        |
| `createBridgeSocketAngularCliProxyConfig` | `bridgesocket/angular/cli` |
| `startBridgeSocketAngularCliBridge`       | `bridgesocket/angular/cli` |
| `withBridgeSocketAngularCliProxyConfig`   | `bridgesocket/angular/cli` |
| `attachBridgeSocketToBunServe`            | `bridgesocket/bun`         |
| `attachBridgeSocketToNodeServer`          | `bridgesocket/node`        |
| `attachBridgeSocketToFastify`             | `bridgesocket/fastify`     |
| `attachBridgeSocketToHonoNodeServer`      | `bridgesocket/hono`        |
| `withBridgeSocketWebpackDevServer`        | `bridgesocket/webpack`     |
| `withBridgeSocketRsbuild`                 | `bridgesocket/rsbuild`     |
| `withBridgeSocketRspack`                  | `bridgesocket/rspack`      |

Preset helper (for tool packages that want one unified export):

```ts
import { createBridgeSocketToolPreset } from "bridgesocket/preset";

export const myTool = createBridgeSocketToolPreset({
  command: "mytool",
  args: ["dev"],
  fallbackCommand: "mytool dev",
});
```

## Configuration

All adapters accept `BridgeSocketAdapterOptions`, which extends bridge/runtime options.

Core options:

| Option                     | Type                                  | Default                       | Notes                                          |
| -------------------------- | ------------------------------------- | ----------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------- |
| `autoStart`                | `boolean`                             | `true`                        | Auto-start runtime on state/proxy/event paths. |
| `bridgePathPrefix`         | `string`                              | `"/__bridgesocket"`           | Route prefix for bridge endpoints.             |
| `fallbackCommand`          | `string`                              | `"bridgesocket dev"`          | Returned in error payloads for recovery UX.    |
| `command`                  | `string`                              | none                          | Required for managed runtime lifecycle.        |
| `args`                     | `string[]`                            | `[]`                          | Runtime process args.                          |
| `cwd`                      | `string`                              | `process.cwd()`               | Runtime working directory.                     |
| `env`                      | `Record<string, string \| undefined>` | none                          | Extra runtime env vars.                        |
| `host`                     | `string`                              | `"127.0.0.1"`                 | Runtime host binding.                          |
| `healthPath`               | `string`                              | `"/api/version"`              | Health probe path used after spawn.            |
| `startTimeoutMs`           | `number`                              | `15000`                       | Runtime health timeout.                        |
| `runtimePortEnvVar`        | `string`                              | `"BRIDGESOCKET_RUNTIME_PORT"` | Env var populated with allocated port.         |
| `eventHeartbeatIntervalMs` | `number`                              | `30000`                       | Ping interval for stale WS client cleanup.     |

Adapter-specific options:

| Option                | Type     | Default                        | Notes                                              |
| --------------------- | -------- | ------------------------------ | -------------------------------------------------- |
| `adapterName`         | `string` | `"bridgesocket-bridge"`        | Plugin/module name where applicable.               |
| `rewriteSource`       | `string` | `"/__bridgesocket/:path*"`     | Rewrite pattern used by Next wrapper.              |
| `nextBridgeGlobalKey` | `string` | auto-generated in Next wrapper | Override for deterministic Next standalone keying. |

## Bridge Routes

With default prefix `/__bridgesocket`:

- `GET /__bridgesocket/health`
- `GET /__bridgesocket/state`
- `GET /__bridgesocket/runtime/status`
- `POST /__bridgesocket/runtime/start`
- `POST /__bridgesocket/runtime/restart`
- `POST /__bridgesocket/runtime/stop`
- `WS /__bridgesocket/events`
- `ANY /__bridgesocket/api/*` (proxied to runtime as `/api/*`)

Notes:

- `GET /state` may auto-start runtime when `autoStart` is enabled.
- bridge routes are query-safe (for example `GET /__bridgesocket/state?source=ui`).
- `POST /runtime/stop` disables auto-start until `start` or `restart` is called.
- bridge-generated errors use envelope shape: `{ success: false, message, error: { code, message, retryable, details? } }`.
- proxied `/api/*` responses pass through upstream status/body/headers and are not envelope-wrapped by default.

## Bridge Events

Current event union:

- `runtime-status`
- `runtime-error`

Bridge-emitted events include:

- `protocolVersion` (`"1"`)
- `eventId` (monotonic per bridge instance)
- `timestamp` (epoch milliseconds)

WebSocket subprotocol:

- supported: `bridgesocket.v1+json`
- if a client sends `Sec-WebSocket-Protocol`, the offered list must include `bridgesocket.v1+json`; otherwise the bridge rejects with `426`
- when accepted, the bridge negotiates `bridgesocket.v1+json`

Type source: `src/types.ts` (`BridgeSocketBridgeEvent`).

## Client API (`bridgesocket/client`)

```ts
import { createBridgeSocketClient } from "bridgesocket/client";

const client = createBridgeSocketClient({
  baseUrl: "http://127.0.0.1:3000",
});

const health = await client.getHealth();
const state = await client.getState();
const runtime = await client.startRuntime();

const unsubscribe = client.subscribeEvents((event) => {
  console.log(event.type, event.eventId);
});

unsubscribe();
```

In Node environments, pass a WebSocket implementation with `webSocketFactory` when needed.

## Adapter Examples

### Next.js

```ts
// next.config.ts
import { withBridgeSocketNext } from "bridgesocket/next";

export default withBridgeSocketNext(
  { reactStrictMode: true },
  {
    command: "node",
    args: ["./scripts/dev-runtime.js"],
  },
);
```

### Astro

```ts
// astro.config.ts
import { defineConfig } from "astro/config";
import { createBridgeSocketAstroIntegration } from "bridgesocket/astro";

export default defineConfig({
  integrations: [createBridgeSocketAstroIntegration()],
});
```

### Nuxt

```ts
// nuxt.config.ts
import { createBridgeSocketNuxtModule } from "bridgesocket/nuxt";
import { defineNuxtConfig } from "nuxt/config";

export default defineNuxtConfig({
  modules: [createBridgeSocketNuxtModule()],
});
```

### Angular CLI (Proxy Config)

```ts
// bridgesocket.proxy.mjs
import { createBridgeSocketAngularCliProxyConfig } from "bridgesocket/angular/cli";
import { writeFile } from "node:fs/promises";

const proxyConfig = await createBridgeSocketAngularCliProxyConfig();
await writeFile(
  new URL("./proxy.bridgesocket.json", import.meta.url),
  JSON.stringify(proxyConfig, null, 2),
);
```

Then:

```bash
node bridgesocket.proxy.mjs
ng serve --proxy-config proxy.bridgesocket.json
```

### Bun.serve

```ts
import {
  attachBridgeSocketToBunServe,
  withBridgeSocketBunServeFetch,
  withBridgeSocketBunServeWebSocketHandlers,
} from "bridgesocket/bun";

const bridgesocket = await attachBridgeSocketToBunServe({
  command: "node",
  args: ["./scripts/dev-runtime.js"],
});

const server = Bun.serve({
  fetch: withBridgeSocketBunServeFetch(
    (request) => new Response(`route: ${new URL(request.url).pathname}`),
    bridgesocket,
  ),
  websocket: withBridgeSocketBunServeWebSocketHandlers(bridgesocket),
});

await bridgesocket.close();
server.stop();
```

### Node Server

```ts
import { attachBridgeSocketToNodeServer } from "bridgesocket/node";
import express from "express";
import http from "node:http";

const app = express();
const server = http.createServer(app);

await attachBridgeSocketToNodeServer(
  {
    middlewares: { use: app.use.bind(app) },
    httpServer: server,
  },
  { command: "node", args: ["./scripts/dev-runtime.js"] },
);
```

### Webpack Dev Server

```ts
import { withBridgeSocketWebpackDevServer } from "bridgesocket/webpack";

export default {
  devServer: withBridgeSocketWebpackDevServer({
    setupMiddlewares: (middlewares) => middlewares,
  }),
};
```

## Next.js Bridge Keys

`withBridgeSocketNext(nextConfig, options)` uses a standalone bridge behind rewrites in development.

Default behavior:

- each wrapper call gets a unique per-instance key
- this avoids collisions when multiple Next servers run in the same process

Optional override:

- set `nextBridgeGlobalKey` when you need deterministic keying or intentionally shared bridge state

```ts
import { withBridgeSocketNext } from "bridgesocket/next";

export default withBridgeSocketNext(
  { reactStrictMode: true },
  {
    nextBridgeGlobalKey: "__BRIDGESOCKET_NEXT_BRIDGE__:workspace-a",
  },
);
```

## Compatibility

- runtime support target: Node.js and Bun
- module format: ESM package (`"type": "module"`)
- CI matrix: Node `20.x`, Node `22.x`, Bun `1.3.9`
- validated by:
  - unit tests
  - adapter integration tests
  - e2e runtime control tests
  - e2e bridge event flow tests

## Documentation

- `README.md`: product overview, installation, and integration entrypoints
- `INTEGRATION_GUIDE.md`: end-to-end example for building a CLI-style tool package and user project setup
- `PROTOCOL.md`: normative bridge contract (routes, events, errors, versioning)
- `ARCHITECTURE.md`: internal component boundaries and data flow

Guardrails:

- `bun run docs:lint` validates markdown docs
- `bun run docs:check` enforces docs synchronization for protocol/API-impacting source changes

## Packaging

Published artifacts are built from `src/` into `dist/` with declaration files:

- runtime JS and `.d.ts` output in `dist`
- package includes `README.md`, `PROTOCOL.md`, `ARCHITECTURE.md`, and `LICENSE`
- release guard via `prepublishOnly`: build + test + typecheck
